feat: document partition detach/attach (#981)
questdb/questdb.io: docs/reference/sql/alter-table-detach-partition.md

---
title: ALTER TABLE DETACH PARTITION
sidebar_label: DETACH PARTITION
description: DETACH PARTITION SQL keyword reference documentation.
---

Detaches one or more partitions from a table and the QuestDB instance. 
This feature is designed to allow users to manipulate detached partitions and migrate them to a cold storage. 
The partitions can be restored to the same table by using the complementary SQL keyword [ALTER TABLE ATTACH PARTITION](alter-table-attach-partition).

:::info

- For a table to support this feature it has to have a [designated timestamp](../../concept/designated-timestamp) column.
- QuestDB does not manipulate the detached partitions. It is for the users to decide whether to compress the files and where to migrate them to.

:::

## Syntax

![Flow chart showing the syntax of ALTER TABLE with DETACH LIST PARTITION keyword](/img/docs/diagrams/alterTableDetachPartition.svg)

> ## Steps

Reviewer: Another example, we talk at bottom of the page what detaching means. This can be in the description of the SQL. We also should answer `why` anyone would want to detach partition. Why can't they move partitions without detaching?

> ## Steps

Reviewer 2: why anyone would want to detach partition:

> This feature is designed to allow users to manipulate detached partitions and migrate them to a cold storage. 

Why can't they move partitions without detaching?
My answer would be something like:
Using `ALTER TABLE DETACH PARTITION` ensures relevant metadata is saved with the partition files, and the partitions can be attached back to the same table in the future. Deleting the partition files directly from the table directory means that the detached partitions won't be able to be attached back to the table.

> ## Steps

Reviewer: We could keep the first sentence only. Explaining that detach does something extra is enough to explain “why”

To detach one or more partitions from a table:

1. Navigate to the table directory nested in the root directory. The root directory is set by `cairo.root` and is set to `db` by default.
2. Amend the partition file suffix to `detached`.
3. Run the `ALTER TABLE DETACH PARTITION` command.
4. Users can decide how to treat the detached partition files.

## Example

Given a table `sensors` defined as:

```questdb-sql
CREATE TABLE sensors AS (
    SELECT
        rnd_symbol('ALPHA', 'OMEGA', 'THETA') id1, 
        rnd_symbol('PHI', 'SIGMA', 'EPSILOM') id2, 
        timestamp_sequence(0, 21600000000) ts 
    FROM long_sequence(10)

> ), INDEX(id2 capacity 32) TIMESTAMP(ts) PARTITION BY HOUR;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
), TIMESTAMP(ts) PARTITION BY HOUR;
```
The existing query works but when I updated it to the above I hit an error "unexpected token"...

> ), INDEX(id2 capacity 32) TIMESTAMP(ts) PARTITION BY HOUR;

Reviewer 2: Removed the comma and it worked.

```

With a total of 10 partitions (one row per partition) the following equivalent queries will detach the 
oldest five partitions:

```questdb-sql
-- either:
ALTER TABLE sensors DETACH PARTITION LIST '1970-01-01T00', '1970-01-01T06', '1970-01-01T12', '1970-01-01T18', '1970-01-02T00';
-- or:
ALTER TABLE sensors DETACH PARTITION WHERE ts <= '1970-01-02T00';
```

The queries result in the following file system structure for the detached partition:

```bash
db
└── sensors
    ├── 1970-01-01T00.detached
        ├── _dmeta
        ├── _dcv
        ├── id1.d
        ├── id2.d
        ├── ...
        └── ts.d
    ├── 1970-01-01T06.detached
        ├── ... 
        └── ts.d   
    ├── 1970-01-01T12.detached
        ├── ... 
        └── ts.d    
    ├── 1970-01-01T18.detached
        ├── ... 
        └── ts.d    
    └── 1970-01-02T00.detached
        ├── ... 
        └── ts.d    
```

> The operation saves global metadata files `_dmeta` and `_dcv` alongside column-related files to 

Reviewer: This is very heavy. I would not mix-in `backups` here nor divulge details of how `detach` works under the hood.

What we should explain instead is that `.detached` directories can be moved elsewhere. 

I would suggest we do not talk about modifying content of the directories. We should discourage that.

be able to attach the partition later. These metadata files represent the state
of the table at the time of detaching and do not exist in [backups](../../operations/backup.md).
Partitions lacking these files will still be attachable, but no checks are performed on the
metadata beyond data file integrity, which means that the table's structure can not change between a
backup and an attach from backup. 

Detaching a partition, however, allows for the table's structure to mutate (add/remove columns, 
but not rename them).

It is not possible to detach the latest partition, where the latest data are appended to (QuestDB 
refers to this partition as an *active* partition), and attempts to detach it will result in an error.

:::caution

> For QuestDB's engine, detaching a partition means that it is no longer accessible for *reads*.

Reviewer: This note ultimately belongs to `attach` page. The reason is that `DETACH` SQL will never fail, only if table is "busy".

On other hand `ATTACH` may fail because partition could have been recreated by O3

---
title: ALTER TABLE DETACH PARTITION
sidebar_label: DETACH PARTITION
description: DETACH PARTITION SQL keyword reference documentation.
---

> Detaches one or more partitions from a table. This feature is designed to support

Reviewer 3: What does detaching mean?
* Does the table get deleted?
* Is it kept, but archived?
* Is the format changed?
* Is this to move data from one database (e.g. holding the latest data) and reattach to another database instance (e.g. the archive database) without having to change format?
* Is this to correct data while it's detached?
* More generally, what is the feature for?

Reviewer 3: Now that I'm reading further, this maybe these questions would be better answered as a guide on data backup and migration (which I think - but I'm not sure - this feature fulfills).

Reviewer 3: Confusingly the "attach" guide states "Moving partitions between tables or database instances is not supported.". I'm pretty lost now.

Reviewer 2: Quick notes from discussion with @bluestreak01 

Purpose - Decouple partitions from the QuestDB instance. Content not manipulated. Allowing users to deposit partitions to cold storage.
Constraint - only to the same table.
Detached partition treatment: QuestDB does not do anything - it leaves room for manual intervention.

Author: The use case, in general, is:
- I have lots of data in my table, and it is partitioned by some granularity that makes me happy (by HOUR say).
- If only I could simply use the last 5 items of said granularity, instead of all my data, i.e. only the last 5 hours...
- oh, wait, I can detach partitions older than 5 hours from now and just focus on "hot data"
- later on I can attach whatever partitions I want if I need more data

re-attaching them back by means of the complementary query [ALTER TABLE ATTACH PARTITION](alter-table-attach-partition.md).

:::info

For a table to support this feature it has to have a [designated timestamp](../../concept/designated-timestamp.md) column.

:::

## Syntax

![Flow chart showing the syntax of ALTER TABLE with DETACH LIST PARTITION keyword](/img/docs/diagrams/alterTableDetachPartition.svg)

## Configuration

The root file system location where QuestDB stores detached partitions is configurable 

> in `server.conf` by means of attribute:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in `server.conf` by using the attribute:
```

`cairo.sql.detached.root=detdb`, the following equivalent queries will detach the 
oldest five partitions:

```questdb-sql
-- either:
ALTER TABLE sensors DETACH PARTITION LIST '1970-01-01T00', '1970-01-01T06', '1970-01-01T12', '1970-01-01T18', '1970-01-02T00';
-- or:
ALTER TABLE sensors DETACH PARTITION WHERE ts <= '1970-01-02T00';
```

resulting in this file system structure for the detached partition:

```bash
detdb
└── sensors
    ├── 1970-01-01T00.detached
        ├── _dmeta
        ├── _dcv
        ├── id1.d
        ├── id2.d
        ├── ...
        └── ts.d
    ├── 1970-01-01T06.detached
        ├── ... 
        └── ts.d   
    ├── 1970-01-01T12.detached
        ├── ... 
        └── ts.d    
    ├── 1970-01-01T18.detached
        ├── ... 
        └── ts.d    
    └── 1970-01-02T00.detached
        ├── ... 
        └── ts.d    
```

The operation saves global metadata files `_dmeta` and `_dcv` alongside column related files to 
be able to attach the partition at a later time. These metadata files represent the state
of the table at the time of detaching and do not exist in [backups](../../operations/backup.md).

> Partitions lacking these files will still be attachable, however no checks are performed on the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Partitions without the  metadata files will still be attachable, but no checks are performed on the
```

metadata beyond data file integrity, which means the table's structure can not change between a
backup and an attach from backup. 

> Detaching a partition however allows for the table's structure to mutate (add/remove columns, 
> but not rename them).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Detaching a partition, however, allows for the table's structure to mutate (add/remove columns, 
but not rename them).
```

Reviewer 2: I am not sure why "however" is used here...

It is not possible to detach the latest partition, where the latest data are appended to (QuestDB 
refers to this partition as *active* partition), trying to detach it will result in an error.

:::caution

> Detaching a partition just tells QuestDB that it no longer is accessible for *reads*.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For QuestDB's engine, detaching a partition means that it is no longer accessible for *reads*.
```

> However if you insert new data under the detached partition's time range, the partition

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, if you insert new data under the detached partition's time range, the partition
```

will be created to host the new data. This will pose a problem when you later on want
to attach the detached version, as data already exists and thus the partition is considered
attached. In this case, you can [drop](alter-table-drop-partition.md)
the existing version and run the attach query again; or you can rename (in the file system)
the current detached version from `*.detached` to `*.something_else` and then issue the
detach command again to detach the partition, point at which you can choose which version 
to rename back to `.attachable` before issuing the attach query.

:::

To attach back one, or more of these partitions, for instance `1970-01-01T18` and `1970-01-02T00`, 

> first we rename the the above file system to:

Reviewer 2: Same as the other file - could we specify the suffix?
